Clay Pot Cooler Training in Mali:
Outcomes & Impacts
   Laura Mogannam - MIT D-Lab, Tufts University
   Fatimata Cissé and Kola Sidiki Cissé - Institut d’Economie Rurale
   Kukom Edoh Ognakossan - World Vegetable Center
   Eric Verploegen - MIT D-Lab


                                                        October 2022




                                                                       1
Table of Contents
Introduction ............................................................................................................................3
   Interview Approach ......................................................................................................................... 4
Results and Discussion ............................................................................................................5
   Respondent Demographics .............................................................................................................. 5
   Previous Storage Methods and Challenges ...................................................................................... 6
   Clay Pot Cooler Adoption and Usage................................................................................................ 8
   Training Participants’ Influence on other Community Members .....................................................12
   Impact ............................................................................................................................................15
   Training Feedback ..........................................................................................................................17
Conclusion ............................................................................................................................ 19
   Recommendations and Next Steps .................................................................................................19
Authors & Acknowledgments ................................................................................................ 22
   About the Authors ..........................................................................................................................22
   Acknowledgments ..........................................................................................................................24
Appendix............................................................................................................................... 25
References ............................................................................................................................ 28




                                                                                                                                                      2
Introduction
In Mali and other parts of Sub-Saharan Africa where access to food preservation methods is
limited, 30-50% of produce is lost during transport or at markets before it ever reaches
households.1 In addition, many households are unable to preserve fresh produce and extend its
shelf life before it spoils. Improving storage options for fruit and vegetables is a simple way to
increase access to fresh produce while reducing expenditures on agricultural inputs. Clay pot
coolers are a simple technology that can improve the shelf life of many fruits and vegetables in
arid regions.2,3,4,5 They are inexpensive and can be made with locally available materials.
Functioning through the principle of evaporative cooling, clay pot coolers provide a cool and
humid environment to store fruits and vegetables, increasing their shelf life. Clay pot coolers can
be made using a clay pot placed in another pot or dish that is filled with wet sand. As the water
evaporates, heat is drawn from the inside of the container, which can be cooled by up to 10°C.6
A schematic of the cooler can be seen in Figure 1 below.




Figure 1. Schematic showing the evaporative cooling principle of clay pot coolers. Water evaporates
creating a cool and humid environment inside the inner pot where vegetables are stored. Clay pot cooler
schematic based on work by Peter Rinker, Movement e.V. and redesigned by Melissa Mangino.


In order to increase awareness and adoption of clay pot coolers, MIT D-Lab, the World Vegetable
Center (WVC), and Institut d'Economie Rurale (IER) developed a training curriculum covering the
importance of proper vegetable storage, principles of evaporative cooling, best practices for
constructing and using clay pot coolers, and user identification and marketing.6 The
dissemination approach starts by conducting in-depth Training of Trainers (ToT) workshops with
agricultural extension agents and clay potters. The trainers then deliver the curriculum to groups

                                                                                                     3
of fruit and vegetable vendors, clay pot makers and sellers, farmers, and other community
members through streamlined half-day training sessions. The first ToT was conducted in January
2020. In March 2020, the first pilot training sessions were held near Mopti with a total of 37
people.6 In-depth information regarding MIT D-Lab’s work in Mali from 2016 to 2021, including
interviews with 33 of the people trained in March 2020 can be found in the following document:
Clay Pot Coolers: Preserving Fruits & Vegetables in Mali.

Following the successful completion of the first pilot training sessions in 2020, WVC and IER
conducted a second larger ToT workshop in February 2021. From April through June of 2021, 11
half-day training sessions were conducted in the Mopti region of Mali with a total of 289
participants. The objective of the training sessions is to encourage the adoption of clay pot
coolers to improve fruit and vegetable storage, reduce postharvest losses at the household level,
and create both supply and demand for clay pot coolers. The training sessions aim to give
participants an understanding of how to assemble and use clay pot coolers and increase their use
throughout the communities. Training participants included clay pot makers and sellers, fruit and
vegetable vendors, and producers and consumers of fruits and vegetables.


Interview Approach
Roughly 10 months after the 11 training sessions conducted in 2021, interviews were conducted
with training participants to understand:
   ● Clay pot cooler adoption rates
   ● How the clay pot coolers were being used
   ● The impacts of clay pot coolers on food loss, fruit and vegetable consumption, and travel
     time purchasing produce
   ● How information about the clay pot coolers was shared beyond the training participants
   ● Participant’s impressions of the training sessions
Participants were contacted via phone and interviewed at their homes. The interviewers were
monitoring and evaluation trainees from the National Directorate of Agriculture who had not
participated in the training program. Responses from the structured interviews were recorded
via KoboCollect on Android devices. Three different sets of questions were given based on the
profile of the respondent. The three different groups were:
   1) Clay pot makers and sellers
   2) Producers and consumers
   3) Fruit and vegetable vendors
A majority of the questions were the same for all groups, with specific additional questions asked
of clay pot makers and sellers, and fruit and vegetable vendors.


                                                                                                4
Results and Discussion
Respondent Demographics
Participants were interviewed 10 months after the training sessions, and the questionnaires used
were tailored to the profile of the respondent. The three groups were producers and consumers
of fruits and vegetables, fruit and vegetable vendors, and clay pot makers and sellers. Producers
and consumers grow and/or consume fruits and vegetables and have storage needs for personal
use. Fruit and vegetable vendors sell fruits and vegetables at markets and may use the clay pot
coolers for both personal and business use. Clay pot makers and sellers have businesses selling
clay pots and were interviewed about their personal use of the coolers as well as their experience
selling clay pot coolers to others. A summary of the groups of those interviewed, as well as the
gender breakdown, is shown in Table 1. A total of 289 people were trained, and 264 of these
training participants were reached for the follow-up interview. Overall, 91% of respondents
identified as female, and 9% of respondents identified as male.

Table 1. Respondent group by number and percentage of people and gender percentage. All participants
in the training sessions were categorized as either clay pot makers and sellers, producers and consumers,
or fruit and vegetable vendors.

  Group                    Number             Percentage                        Gender

                                                                     Female                 96%
  Clay Pot Makers
                              54                  20%
  and Sellers
                                                                       Male                  4%

                                                                     Female                 89%
  Producers and
                             194                  74%
  Consumers
                                                                       Male                 11%

  Fruit and                                                          Female                 94%
  Vegetable                   16                   6%
  Vendors                                                              Male                  6%


Eleven training sessions were held in 10 communes within the Mopti Cercle within the Mopti
region of Mali. Two training sessions were held in the commune of Mopti. Because clay potters
were recruited from a cooperative located in the commune of Mopti, a majority (93%) of the clay
pot makers and sellers are from this commune. A full summary of the ages of participants and
the number of respondents per commune can be found in Tables A1 and A2 in the appendix.



                                                                                                       5
Previous Storage Methods and Challenges
In order to understand the previous fruit and vegetable storage habits, participants were asked
about the methods of storage they used prior to the training and the issues they had with these
methods. A summary of the responses can be found in Tables 2 and 3. Vendors were specifically
asked how they previously stored fruits and vegetables at their businesses and home.
Before the training, most respondents in all three groups stored their fruits and vegetables in an
uncovered basket, basin, or jar. It is notable that many respondents were using a storage method
prior to the training that relies on the principle of evaporative cooling, such as on moistened
sand, under a damp cloth, or near a water container. This indicates that participants may have
already been directly or indirectly familiar with the principles of evaporative cooling.

Table 2. Locations of where fruits and vegetables were stored by the various respondent groups before
training. Vendors were asked separate questions about where they previously stored fruits and vegetables
in the home as well as at their place of business. The total number of respondents is listed in brackets.
Most respondents gave more than one response to this question.

                                                         Producers
                                          Clay pot                         Vendors        Vendors at
                                                            and
  Storage Method                         makers and                        at home         business
                                                         Consumers
                                         sellers [54]                        [16]            [16]
                                                           [194]

  Basket, basin, or jar - uncovered         93%              59%             75%              88%
  Basket, basin, or jar - covered with
                                            41%              12%             25%              38%
  a damp cloth
  Near water container                      24%              25%             19%               0%

  On the floor                              30%              23%              0%               0%

  On wet sand                               22%              21%             38%               0%

  In a bag                                  35%              11%             13%              38%

  On top of a bag                           33%               0%              0%               0%

  Refrigerator                               2%               4%             13%              13%

  Other                                      2%               4%             25%              19%


In an arid region like Mopti, exposure of fruits and vegetables to hot and dry conditions can make
them spoil faster. In order to gain insight into the current challenges facing the community in
Mopti, interviewers posed questions regarding the specific issues they face with food loss.
Response rates regarding issues participants experienced with food storage are shown in Table


                                                                                                       6
3. Rot was the issue experienced by the most respondents when storing fruits and vegetables
prior to the training sessions. Dehydration, pests, yellowing, mold, and wilting were additional
responses that were recorded. Of those who selected “other,” issues explained in the narrative
responses included theft.

Table 3. Percentage of respondents across all groups who experienced various issues when storing food.
Vendors were asked separate questions about food storage issues at home as well as at their place of
business. The total number of respondents is listed in brackets. Most respondents gave more than one
response to this question.

                   Clay pot makers      Producers and          Vendors at           Vendors at
 Issues
                   and sellers [54]    Consumers [194]         home [16]           business [16]

 Rot                    94%                   87%                  88%                 100%

 Dehydration            56%                   64%                  88%                  75%

 Pests                  72%                   54%                  56%                  50%

 Yellowing              81%                   49%                  31%                  6%

 Mold                   69%                   42%                  25%                  44%

 Wilting                67%                   32%                  25%                  25%

 Other                   0%                   5%                   19%                  19%




Participants assembling clay pot coolers at a training of trainers (ToT) workshop in Bamako, Mali in
February 2021. Photo credit: World Vegetable Center.


                                                                                                    7
Clay Pot Cooler Adoption and Usage
To gain insight on how clay pot coolers were adopted into the community, we asked whether or
not participants used the devices and if so, how they used them. Seventy-three percent (73%) of
the respondents reported adopting the technology within 10 months after their participation in
a clay pot cooler training. The clay pot cooler adoption rates for each of the three groups before
and after the training is shown in Table 4 below. Thirteen percent (13%) of the producers and
consumers reported having used a clay pot cooler before, while no vendors or clay pot makers
and sellers reported personal use of clay pot coolers prior to attending the training session. Prior
to the training sessions. 39% of clay pot makers and sellers had made or sold clay pot coolers.
Since the training sessions, all clay pot makers and sellers reported selling clay pot coolers.

Table 4. Usage rates of clay pot coolers before and after the training for all three groups. The number of
respondents for each group is listed in brackets.

                                         Clay pot makers        Producers and       Fruit and vegetable
                                            and sellers          Consumers                vendors
                                               [54]                 [194]                   [16]

  Percent that used clay pot coolers
                                                0%                   13%                    0%
  before the training

  Percent that have used clay pot
                                                94%                  70%                    50%
  coolers since the training


The majority (70%) of clay pot makers and sellers made their clay pot coolers themselves either
from materials that they owned or materials they purchased. Eighty-seven percent (87%) of
producers and consumers reported buying a complete evaporative cooling pot from a seller, and
the others reported making it using materials that they owned or had purchased. Vendors were
not asked about where they got their clay pot coolers in their interviews. Table A3 in the appendix
provides details on where users acquired their clay pot cooler. Clay pot makers and sellers and
fruit and vegetable vendors were also asked where they got the materials to make their clay pot
cooler. Most pot makers used their own materials or obtained materials from their neighbors.
Vendors mostly acquired materials from the local market. Producers and consumers were not
asked about where they got the materials to make their clay pot cooler; however, only 4% of
them made it themselves. Table A4 in the appendix provides details on where users acquired
materials to make their clay pot cooler.




                                                                                                          8
Three types of clay pot coolers are described in the training curriculum: clay pot-in-clay pot, clay
pot-in-plastic-dish, and clay pot-in-clay dish. A schematic of the three designs can be seen in
Figure 2 below. All types contain an outer vessel such as a larger pot, plastic dish, or clay dish that
is filled with sand. An inner pot, where the fruits and vegetables are stored, is placed inside the
outer vessel. The sand is then wet, and the device is covered with a damp cloth.




Figure 2. Schematic of three clay pot cooler devices: clay pot-in-clay pot, clay pot-in-plastic-dish, and
clay pot-in-clay dish7.


To gain insight into potential preferences for the types of clay pot coolers, we asked users which
types they used. A summary of responses is shown in Figure 3. Clay pot makers and sellers were
the most likely to use a clay pot-in-pot cooler design. This may be due to their ability to access
clay pots with a range of dimensions, allowing them to identify inner and outer pot pairs that are
well suited to use for a clay pot cooler. The clay pot-in-plastic dish design was the most commonly
used by producers and consumers, as they may not have access to appropriately sized outer clay
pots or clay dishes, whereas plastic dishes are commonly found in a range of sizes throughout
the Mopti. Vendors used clay pot-in-clay pot coolers the most, and clay pot-in-plastic dish coolers
the least.




                                                                                                            9
Figure 3: Percentage of users across each group who used each type of clay pot cooler. Fifty-one (51) clay
pot makers and sellers, 194 producers and consumers, and 8 vendors who used clay pot coolers were
asked this question. Many respondents gave more than one response to this question.


Of the 27 % of respondents who did not use a clay pot cooler after the training, the most common
reasons for not using the technology were that they did not have significant storage needs, the
capacity of the clay pot cooler was not large enough for their storage needs, they did not have
enough money to buy a clay pot cooler, or their current preservation method was good enough,
as seen in Table 5 below. For training participants that responded that they did not have
significant storage needs, they are unlikely to adopt the clay pot cooler or any food storage
device. However, for those who did not have enough money, could not find the materials, or
needed a larger storage capacity, changes could be made to the designs discussed in future
training sessions to try and increase the adoption rate. These recommendations will be discussed
in Section 4.2. When asked about their storage needs, respondents replied that the average fruit
and vegetable storage capacity needed at one time was 6 kg for pot makers, 46 kg for producers
and consumers, and 196 kg for fruit and vegetable vendors. It is notable that the groups with the
greater storage needs reported the relatively small capacity of clay pot coolers as a factor
inhibiting their adoption of clay pot coolers as shown in Table 5.




                                                                                                       10
Table 5. A list of the reasons why respondents did not use a clay pot cooler for each user group. The
number of non-user respondents is listed in the brackets. The total number of clay pot cooler non-users
is listed in brackets. Some respondents gave more than one response to this question.

                                             Clay Pot                        Fruit and
                                                           Producers and                     Total
  Reason                                    Makers and                       vegetable
                                                          consumers [59]                     [70]
                                            Sellers [3]                     vendors [8]
  Not enough money to buy a clay
                                                0%              17%              0%           14%
  evaporative cooling pot

  Couldn't find the materials to make
                                                0%              3%              13%           4%
  the clay evaporative cooling pots

  My storage needs (volume) are more
  than one clay pot cooler can                  0%              12%             75%           19%
  accommodate
  I don't have significant storage needs       67%              39%              0%           36%

  My current preservation method is
                                                0%              22%              0%           19%
  good enough / better
  Other                                        33%              49%             50%           49%


The location of a clay pot cooler can have an impact on the device’s performance, as the
evaporation of water requires a well-ventilated area to prevent an increase in ambient humidity.
Additionally, if the clay pot cooler is exposed to direct sunlight, heat will be absorbed by the
device and the temperature of the interior storage environment will increase. These points were
addressed in the training and guidance provided in the printed training guide.7 When asked about
the location of their clay pot coolers, most (93%) respondents said that they kept their clay pot
coolers in a compound outside the house either under a tree or under another shade structure.
Only 11% reported locating their clay pot coolers indoors and none reported keeping the clay pot
coolers in the sun. These results indicate that the guidance given during the training is being
followed by a large majority of the users. Table A5 in the appendix provides more detail on these
responses.

Participants were specifically asked the rate the performance of their clay pot coolers, and 98%
of all clay pot cooler users rated the performance as good or very good. Two respondents in the
producers and consumers group answered that the performance was average. This result is a
good indicator that the clay pot coolers worked well within these communities and climate.
Participants were asked to explain what their most important considerations were for storing
fruits and vegetables in their homes. Common responses included increasing shelf life, reducing



                                                                                                     11
the frequency of going to the market, having a large storage capacity, having higher humidity,
and the increased availability of fruits and vegetables.

Thirty-four percent (34%) of respondents said that there are changes they would like to make the
clay pot cooler. Among the 65 respondents that suggested changes, the most common response
(35% of respondents) was a desire for increasing the capacity of the cooler. Other changes
desired included adding feet to the device, modernizing the pot, and reducing the cost of the
device. Addressing these issues in future training sessions may help increase the adoption rate
going forward. Vendors were asked if there were any different considerations for storing fruits
and vegetables in their home versus at their place of business. The most common responses were
related to the different types and volumes of crops that needed to be stored at home and at their
businesses.

Clay pot makers and sellers were specifically asked about their experience making and selling the
pots. All clay pot makers and sellers ranked their customers' perception of the pot as very good
or good. However, twelve percent (12%) of clay pot makers and sellers had some difficulties
making the necessary pots for the clay pot coolers. Some of these difficulties were low-quality
clay, pot breakage, and the expense of wood needed to fire the clay pots. Nine percent (9%) of
pot makers and sellers reported that they had some difficulties marketing and selling the pots
due to not having enough customers or slow sales. The clay pot makers and sellers suggested
that their difficulties in making clay pot coolers could be fixed by increasing awareness of the clay
pot coolers to attract more customers, receiving financial assistance, having better access to
transportation to move the product, and gaining better access to raw materials.


Training Participants’ Influence on other Community Members
Other members of the community, beyond those who participated in the training, can benefit
from the introduction of clay pot coolers to the community. Clay pot makers and sellers may
advertise clay pot coolers to their customers and all participants of the training may talk with
other members of the community about attending the training and how the clay pot coolers
function. The people who gained awareness of the technology without participating in the
training are indirect beneficiaries of the training program. The 54 clay pot makers and sellers
report selling a total of 1,999 clay pot coolers since attending a training session, with an average
of 37 clay pot coolers sold. Clay pot coolers were sold in a variety of different sizes with a range
of costs. The number of clay pot coolers sold is over eight times higher than the number of
producers and consumers and vendors trained. This indicates that other members of the
community saw the benefit of clay pot coolers and thought they were worth purchasing without
attending a training session.



                                                                                                  12
Most (59%) clay pot makers and sellers sold more than one clay pot cooler design. Figure 4 shows
the types of clay pot coolers sold. The clay pot-in-clay pot design was the most commonly sold
with 94% of respondents selling this design. The clay pot-in-plastic dish and clay pot-in-clay dish
were also sold by 54% and 41% of respondents, respectively.

The majority (93%) of clay pot makers and sellers also sold clay pot coolers to many different
members of the community including producers, fruit and vegetable vendors, pot sellers, and
households. Figure 5 below shows which groups within the community bought clay pot makers
from sellers. When clay pot makers were asked about how they identified potential customers,
they answered by saying they communicated with the customers, knew the customer
participated in the training, or followed customer requests. Ensuring the clay pot makers have a
market beyond those who participated in the training makes the project more sustainable, as
sales and adoption of the technology can continue to grow beyond the initial training sessions.




Figure 4. Percentage of clay pot sellers who sold each type of clay pot cooler — clay pot-in-clay pot, clay
pot-in-plastic dish, and clay pot-in-clay dish. All 54 clay pot makers and sellers sold at least one type of
clay pot cooler. Many respondents gave more than one response to this question.




                                                                                                         13
Figure 5. Percentage of clay pot sellers who sold clay pot coolers to different community members —
producers, fruit and vegetable vendors, pot sellers, and households. A total of 54 clay pot sellers sold
clay pot coolers. Most respondents gave more than one response to this question.


Participants were asked about their confidence in communicating about clay pot coolers, and
97% of respondents reported feeling confident in sharing information with others about the clay
pot coolers. This confidence in communicating allowed 94% of respondents to share information
about the clay pot coolers with others in their community. This means that an additional 21% of
participants who did not adopt the technology themselves, still shared information about it with
others. These respondents shared information about the clay pot coolers with a total of 4,396
people, an average of 17 people being told per training participant. Among those who shared
information about clay pot coolers, 95% reported that the people with whom they shared the
information found it useful, i.e., they reported using and liking the technology. Table 6 details the
profile of the community members with whom training participants shared information about
clay pot coolers. Respondents shared information primarily with family members, neighbors, fruit
and vegetable vendors, and clay pot coolers who also shared information with their customers.

The large number of people who were told about the clay pot coolers and the large number of
clay pot coolers sold beyond those who participated in the training are great indicators of the
success of the technology in the region. If information about the utility of clay pot coolers in
storing fruits and vegetables can be spread via word of mouth, more people can benefit from the
technology. The impact of using clay pot coolers on those who participated in the interview is
discussed in the next section.



                                                                                                           14
Table 6. Percentage of respondents across all three groups who shared information about clay pot coolers
with various members of the community — customers, neighbors, family members, and
group/cooperative members. The total number of respondents is listed in brackets. Most respondents
gave more than one response to this question.

  Group information was               Clay pot makers        Producers and        Fruit and vegetable
  shared with                         and sellers [54]      consumers [194]          vendors [16]
  Customers                                 87%                    21%                    81%
  Neighbors                                 98%                    63%                    69%
  Family members                            94%                    82%                    69%
  Group/cooperative members                 35%                    39%                    50%
  Other (comment)                           0%                     2%                     0%




Impact
To understand the impact of clay pot coolers on the lives of participants, questions were asked
about changes in lifestyle, food storage challenges, and food storage habits. In addition to the
73% of respondents who used a clay pot cooler, an additional 8% of respondents (22 people)
did not use clay pot coolers, but reported other changes in the way they store fruits and
vegetables. The changes these non-users reported include separating their produce based on
ethylene compatibility guidelines provided in the training and covering a basket with a damp
cloth. One-hundred percent (100%) of clay pot cooler users said the performance of the clay
pot cooler is better than their previous method of fruit and vegetable storage at home.
Additionally, 41% of non-users perceived the clay pot cooler as better than their previous
method of storage before the training. These responses indicate that clay pot coolers are
favorably viewed as a food storage solution among those who participate in the interview.

Increasing the shelf life of fruits and vegetables for people can have further impacts, including
reductions in food spoilage, saving time and money, and improved nutrition. Figure 6 shows
impacts reported by clay pot cooler users. Over 3.6 million people in Mali struggle with food
insecurity yearly on average — with the Mopti region being particularly affected.8 Fruits and
vegetables contain essential micronutrients, which are especially important for vulnerable
populations such as children under five years of age and pregnant and lactating women. With
88% of clay pot cooler users eating more fruits and vegetables compared to before the training,
a positive impact on their nutrition is being made. The majority of users (95%) also reported
spending less time traveling to buy fruits and vegetables. The task of buying produce often falls
to women, who can spend hours traveling to and from the market multiple times per week.



                                                                                                     15
Longer shelf life allows for more fruits and vegetables to be bought at once, reducing the
number of times needed to go to the market. This reduces the time burden on women and
girls, who can then spend more time on other activities such as attending school, working, and
engaging with family and the community. Ninety-eight percent (98%) of users also report less
food waste, directly supporting two UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): Zero Hunger
(SDG 2) and Responsible Production and Consumption (SDG 12). If fruits and vegetables spoil, it
wastes the money, time, and energy spent to get that food to the consumer. Less waste will
also make more food available for the consumer, so clay pot coolers are a tool that can help
reduce food insecurity in the region.

With increasing global temperatures, food waste is likely to grow in the hot and dry climate of
Mali. Clay pot coolers can improve resilience to the negative impacts of climate change through
better food storage. Additionally, global food loss and waste generate 4.4 Gt CO2 equivalent
annually, accounting for about 8% of total anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions,9 which is
comparable (87%) to global road transport emissions.10 Less food waste reduces carbon
emissions from decomposing fruits and vegetables. Furthermore, by reducing the amount of
fruit and vegetable production needed by having more food reach consumers before spoiling,
greenhouse gas emissions and other environmental impacts of the agricultural sector can be
reduced. Therefore, in arid areas where clay pot coolers work best, and where people are
struggling with food loss, this simple technology that can increase fruit and vegetable shelf life
can also have a positive impact on not only the lives of users, but the greater community and
the environment.




Figure 6. Impacts on fruit and vegetable consumption, waste, and time spent traveling to buy fruits and
vegetables were reported by 194 clay pot cooler users.




                                                                                                    16
Training Feedback
During the half-day training sessions, the following topics are covered during the training include:
           ● How evaporative cooling works
           ● Importance of proper fruit and vegetable storage
           ● Types of clay pot coolers and how to assemble them
           ● Fruit and vegetable compatibility
           ● Best practices for using clay pot coolers

To gather feedback on the training, they were asked about which topics they retained
information about, which topics they appreciated the most, and which topics they thought could
be improved. A full summary of responses can be seen in Table 7 below. Across all three groups
interviewed, the topics retained by respondents the most were the importance of fruit and
vegetable storage (90%), followed by the principles of evaporative cooling (78%). The topic
retained the least by all three groups were the rules of fruit and vegetable ethylene compatibility.

Most respondents (81%) said they appreciated the aspects of the training regarding the
importance of fruit and vegetable cooling and preservation, followed by the principles of
evaporative cooling and types of evaporative cooling devices (78%). While the importance of fruit
and vegetable cooling and preservation was the aspect appreciated the most by producers,
consumers, pot makers, and pot sellers; no vendors selected this topic as one they appreciated.
When asked to explain the most beneficial aspects of the training, common responses were that
the technology was easy to understand, it provided the benefit of improving fruit and vegetable
shelf life, and the information provided in the training was clear. Some commented that the least
beneficial aspects of the training were that they had greater storage needs than the clay pot
coolers could provide and some wished that the training provided them with a clay pot cooler.
The team conducting the training has chosen not to provide clay pot coolers to participants to
encourage the independent adoption of the technology in the area.

When asked about what could be improved in the training, 43% of fruit and vegetable vendors,
producers, and consumers reported that they had no suggestions for improvements. The areas
of the training participants that participants thought could be improved were: principles of
evaporative cooling (41%), types of evaporative cooling devices (31%), and manufacture and
assembly of evaporative cooling devices (29%). Sixty-three percent (63%) of vendors answered
that the good user practices aspect of the training is in most need of improvement. Other
suggestions for improvements to the training sessions include a longer training session duration,
a follow-up training session, and more training sessions. This feedback has been taken into
consideration as revisions to the training program have been made.



                                                                                                 17
Table 7. Number and percentage of respondents who retained, appreciated, and wanted improvements
on the various topics taught during the training. The total number of respondents was 264 and the number
of responses for each topic is listed in brackets. Among the fruit and vegetable vendors, producers and
consumers, 43% [113 participants] reported that they had no suggestions for improvements. Most
respondents gave more than one response to this question.

                                                                                     Percentage
                                              Percentage          Percentage
                                                                                    [Number] of
                                             [Number] of         [Number] of
   Topics                                                                         respondents who
                                          respondents who      respondents who
                                                                                 thought topic could
                                            retained topic     appreciated topic
                                                                                    be improved

   Importance of cooling vegetables              90%                  81%                  18%

   Good user practices                           62%                  63%                  29%
   Manufacture and assembly of
                                                 67%                  58%                  31%
   evaporative cooling devices
   Principles of evaporative cooling             78%                  78%                  41%
   Rules of ethylene                             43%                  41%                  5%
   User identification and marketing            24%*                  34%                  11%
   Other                                         1%                   6%                   38%

*Only clay pot makers and sellers were asked whether they retained the topic of user identification and
marketing. The percentage is out of 54 clay pot makers and sellers.




                                                                                                     18
Conclusion
The results from the interviews indicate that the training sessions were successful in stimulating
the adoption of clay pot coolers within the communities. Not only did 73% of participants adopt
the use of clay pot coolers, nearly 2,000 clay pot coolers were sold by training participants. This
indicates that a food storage need in the community is being addressed by the use of clay pot
coolers. In addition, clay pot makers and sellers were able to expand their businesses to sell clay
pot coolers and meet the demand of this new market. Additionally, participants shared
information about clay pot coolers with over 4,000 people, indicating that participants like using
the clay pot coolers enough to tell others in the community about the technology. Participants
report experiencing less food loss, eating more fruits and vegetables, and spending less time
traveling to purchase produce. These results indicate that the increased shelf life of fruits and
vegetables enabled by using a clay pot cooler can lead to better nutrition for populations
vulnerable to deficiencies. Clay pot coolers also help reduce the time burden for women to
purchase produce at the market, allowing them to engage in other activities. The reductions in
food loss experienced by clay pot cooler users can increase fruit and vegetable availability in local
communities and lower greenhouse gas emissions associated with food production and waste.
How to best improve and scale up the program to expand the positive impacts of clay pot coolers
will be discussed in the next section.


Recommendations and Next Steps
MIT D-Lab is looking to continue working with organizations in Mali and other suitable regions
that are well positioned to implement a clay pot cooler training program and scale up the
dissemination of clay pot coolers.

Adaptations to the existing training plan and curriculum are planned based on the participants'
feedback given during the interviews described in this paper. The most important and
consequential feedback was the need for devices with larger storage capacity expressed by many
participants. This feedback came both as a reason that people did not decide to adopt the
technology, and as the most common suggestion from clay pot cooler users when asked how the
technology could be improved.

While clay pot cooler capacity is limited by the size of the largest clay pot currently available
locally, efforts can be made to increase the supply of materials for larger pots and to provide
users with guidance to construct or purchase larger clay pot coolers. Before undertaking these
efforts, MIT D-Lab conducted heat transfer modeling and laboratory testing to confirm that larger
clay pot coolers would be able to provide a storage environment similar to the clay pot cooler


                                                                                                  19
designs already being promoted. This testing indicates similar results, with larger devices taking
longer for initial cooling, but providing a more stable temperature across multiple days. If users
have storage needs greater than 100 kg of fruits and vegetables, multiple clay pot coolers or
other devices such as brick evaporative cooling chambers should be considered.

For future training programs, we will make modifications to the curriculum to provide more detail
on the various sizes of clay pot coolers that can be assembled, and will use larger pots in
demonstrations and/or specifically inform participants that they can use pots that are larger than
the ones being used in the demonstration. Furthermore, we will provide clay pot makers and
sellers with information about the demand for larger clay pot coolers to encourage them to make
devices that can meet this demand.

The cost of clay pot cooler materials was a concern for participants, for both those that did and
those that did not adopt the technology after the training. Because the training program does
not engage directly with the sourcing of materials, there are limitations on how much an
implementer can influence the cost of clay pot coolers. Given the high rate of adoption with the
current program structure, subsidies for the cost of materials for participants would not be
recommended as this could disincentivize other community members from adopting the
technology without a subsidy. Our recommendation is for program implementers to dedicate
time to identifying the most cost-effective local suppliers of materials that are suitable for clay
pot coolers. This will allow implementers to direct participants to these lower-cost suppliers.

Some participants requested that they be provided with funds to cover their cost of
transportation to attend a training, and depending on the specific context where a training
program is being implemented, providing a transportation stipend to participants for attending
the training could be feasible and beneficial.

Additionally, there were requests for a refresher to the training at a later date to reinforce the
content. The first step is providing participants with information on clay pot coolers after the
training to make sure that participants have access to the printed training guide. This guide is
currently available in English, French, Bambara, Spanish, Swahili, and Hindi. For programs that
conduct follow-up interviews with participants, these points of contact could be an opportunity
to reinforce key pieces of content from the training. MIT D-Lab, World Vegetable Center, and
Institut d'Economie Rurale are exploring options for disseminating and reinforcing content about
clay pot coolers through rural radio, SMS communications, and low-bandwidth videos that will
increase the reach of information about clay pot coolers.

Lastly, more evidence is needed to encourage governments, aid agencies, and implementers of
development programs to invest in replicating this clay pot cooler training program in new
regions and at larger scales. Additional impact evaluations need to be conducted to gain a better
understanding of how clay pot coolers can help provide better fruit and vegetable storage for


                                                                                                20
more communities. The team is looking to replicate this program at larger scales coupled with
more rigorous impact assessments in order to probe more deeply into the impact of the program
on fruit and vegetable consumption, time savings, and food loss for users. Furthermore, given
the large number of indirect beneficiaries (1,999 clay pot coolers sold and 4,396 people that
learned about the technology from the 289 participants), there may be a need for a quasi-
experimental or randomized impact evaluation to capture the impact of this training program on
communities.




Participants and facilitators at the completion of a clay pot cooler training of trainers (ToT) workshop in
Bamako, Mali in February 2021. Photo credit: World Vegetable Center.




                                                                                                         21
Authors & Acknowledgments
About the Authors
Laura Mogannam, Tufts University
Ms. Mogannam is a senior studying Environmental Engineering at Tufts University. She worked
as a Monitoring and Evaluation Intern at MIT D-Lab in the summer of 2022. Her strong interest
in user-centered design and international development led her to join the clay pot cooler project.
She has previously worked on projects with Engineers Without Borders in Nicaragua and the
Resource Efficiency in Architecture and Planning Department at the HafenCity University in
Hamburg, Germany.



Fatimata CISSE, Laboratoire de Technologie Alimentaire, Institut d’Economie Rurale (IER)
Dr. Cissé has a Ph.D. degree in Food Science (area Food for Health) from Purdue University. She
is currently the head of the Food Technology Laboratory (LTA) at the Regional Agricultural
Research Centre (CRRA) of Sotuba of Institut d’Economie Rurale (IER). After more than 20 years
of work at IER, she has a strong academic background and experience on food product
development, food product characterization and food loss reduction, training, and mentoring.
Dr. Cissé is involved in a number of regional and sub-regional R&D and R4D projects within the
area of product development, shelf-life studies, value addition techniques, and food product
analysis.

Contact: diallofati@gmail.com



Kola Sidiki CISSE, Laboratoire de Technologie Alimentaire, Institut d’Economie Rurale (IER)
Mr. Cissé, is a research associate at the Laboratory of Food Technology (LTA) of the Institute of
Rural Economy (IER). He obtained a Master's degree in Microbiology at the University of Mascara
in Algeria before going to the University Joseph Fourier of Grenoble for a Master's degree in
Molecular Biology. He then continued his studies at the Claude Bernard University in Lyon where
he obtained a Master's degree in Public Health. He worked for a long time in the health field
before joining the teaching research corps from where he was assigned to the LTA. His research
interests include, in addition to health, the food system, the improvement of traditional
techniques of processing and conservation of food products, moral and Islamic law. He is very
attached to family and societal values.




                                                                                               22
Kukom Edoh Ognakossan, World Vegetable Center (WVC)
Mr. Kukom, a national of Togo, is working as a postharvest loss (PHL) reduction expert with the
World Food Programme to support its corporate PHL agenda. Kukom is a postharvest specialist
with 11 years of experience in agricultural research and development working on postharvest
management of staple crops and vegetables. He has worked with the World Vegetable Center in
Mali as a Production & Postharvest specialist and Research Assistant. Prior to joining the World
Vegetable Center, he was a research fellow under the RELOAD (Reduction of Postharvest Losses
and Value Addition in East African Food Value Chains) project at icipe (International Center of
Insect Physiology and ecology Kenya). He previously worked as a Research Assistant in the
Postharvest Management and Food Safety Department of the International Institute of Tropical
Agriculture (IITA) in Benin. Mr. Kukom holds an M.Sc degree in Food Science and Technology from
Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology (JKUAT), Kenya, and an Agricultural
Engineer degree (“Ingénieur Agronome”), with major in Crop Production/Crop protection from
the University of Lomé, Togo.



Eric Verploegen, MIT D-Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Dr. Verploegen has a Ph.D. from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Polymer Science in
Technology. He is currently a Research Engineer at MIT D-Lab, where his work focuses on helping
organizations based in low-income regions identify technologies, products, and distribution
strategies to increase, energy access, agricultural productivity, and food security in their
communities. Prior to D-Lab, Eric worked on developing materials for solar cells and waste
remediation systems for the oil and gas industry. Eric has been working on researching,
developing, and deploying clay pot coolers and other evaporative cooling technologies in Mali
since 2016. He has conducted work in Niger, Burkina Faso, Uganda, Rwanda, Kenya, and Gujarat,
India related to evaporative cooling technologies for improving fruit and vegetable preservation.

Contact: ericv@mit.edu
https://d-lab.mit.edu/clay-pot-coolers




                                                                                              23
Acknowledgments
This program was funded in part with the generous support of the American people through the
United States Agency for International Development (USAID) under cooperative agreement
number AID-OAA-A-12-00095. The contents are the responsibility of MIT D-Lab and do not
necessarily reflect the views of USAID or the United States government. The program also
received generous funding from the Islamic Development Bank (IsDB), and the Tufts University
Career Center.

The clay pot cooler training of trainers (ToT) workshop in Bamako and the clay pot cooler trainings
in Mopti were organized and conducted by the Kukom Edoh Ognakossan, Alkassim Dicko, and
Mariame Sogoba from the World Vegetable Center (WVC); Fatimata Cissé, Kola Sidiki Cissé, and
Aly Ahamadou from Institut d'Economie Rurale (IER); and Djiguiba Boureima from the Direction
Régionale de l'Agriculture du Mopti (DRA Mopti).

Umang Bansal provided support on the preparation of the questionnaires used in this study.

Cover design and editing: Nancy Adams

Cover photo: Kadidia Nienta conducting a clay pot cooler training at the Anya-Lobo Cooperative
Society in Mopti, Mali. Photo credit: Djiguiba Boureima

Suggested citation:
Mogannam, L., Cissé, F., Cissé, K, S., Ognakossan, K. E., Verploegen, E. (2022). Clay Pot Cooler
Training in Mali: Outcomes and Impacts. Copyright © Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(Accessed on [insert date]).




                                                                                                24
Appendix
Table A1. Average, minimum and maximum age of respondents. The total number of respondents is listed
in brackets.

                             Clay pot makers           Producers and          Fruit and vegetable
                             and sellers [54]         consumers [194]            vendors [16]

 Average age                        35                       39                       34

 Minimum age                        18                       17                       25

 Maximum age                        57                       82                       50



Table A2. Summary of which commune respondents were from. Eleven training sessions were held in ten
communes in the Mopti region. Two training sessions were held in the commune of Mopti. The total
number of respondents is listed in brackets.

                     Clay pot makers       Producers and      Fruit and vegetable          Total
 Commune name
                     and sellers [54]     consumers [194]        vendors [16]              [264]

 Doundou                     0                   30                     0                   30

 Fatoma                      0                   21                     4                   25

 Konna                       1                   19                     6                   26

 Korientze                   1                   24                     0                   25

 Mopti                      50                   9                      2                   61

 Ouro Modi                   0                   25                     0                   25

 Sendegue                    0                   19                     0                   19

 Sevare                      2                   14                     1                   17

 Soufroulaye                 0                   17                     3                   20

 Soyed                       0                   16                     0                   16




                                                                                                    25
Table A3. How respondents acquired a clay pot cooler. This question was only asked to clay pot makers
and sellers and producers and consumers. The total number of users is listed in brackets. Some
respondents gave more than one response to this question.

                                      Clay pot makers        Producers and
                                                                                      Total [186]
                                      and sellers [51]      consumers [135]
 I made it myself from materials
                                            51%                    3%                    16%
 I already had
 I made it myself from materials
                                            71%                    7%                    24%
 I purchased
 I bought a complete clay pot
                                            29%                    87%                   72%
 cooler from a seller
 Other                                       0%                    4%                     3%



Table A4. Where respondents acquired materials to make a clay pot cooler. This question was only asked
to pot makers and sellers and fruit and vegetable vendors. The total number of respondents is listed in
brackets. Some respondents gave more than one response to this question.

                                      Clay pot makers      Fruit and vegetable
                                                                                      Total [143]
                                      and sellers [135]        vendors [8]

 Used own materials                         21%                    13%                   20%

 From local market                           7%                    63%                   10%

 From clay pot sellers in the city          13%                    25%                   13%

 Other (comment)                             1%                    13%                    1%

 From the neighbor(s)                       21%                    0%                    20%




                                                                                                    26
Table A5. Locations where respondents across all groups kept their clay pot cooler. The total number of
users is listed in brackets. Some respondents gave more than one response to this question.

                                            Clay pot                       Fruit and
                                                      Producers and
                                           makers and                      vegetable        Total
                                                        consumers
                                             sellers                        vendors         [194]
                                                          [135]
                                              [51]                            [8]
 In the room/ bedroom                          10%            11%             13%            11%
 In the compound of the house (outside
                                               61%            70%             88%            68%
 a room/ bedroom) under a shed
 In the compound of the house (outside
                                               92%            26%             38%            44%
 a room/ bedroom) under a tree
 Under a shed in the market                    N/A            N/A             50%            2%
 Within the confines of the house
 (outside a room) left out in the sun           0%             0%             0%             0%
 (no protection to create shade)




                                                                                                    27
References
1. Makule, E., Dimoso, N. & Tassou, S. (2022). Precooling and Cold Storage Methods for Fruits and
   Vegetables in Sub-Saharan Africa—A Review. Horticulturae. 8. 776. 10.3390/horticulturae8090776.
2. Verploegen, E., Sanogo, O. & Chagomoka, T. (2018). Evaluation of Low-Cost Vegetable Cooling and
   Storage Technologies in Mali. Copyright © Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
   https://d-lab.mit.edu/resources/publications/evaporative-cooling-technologies-improved-
   vegetable-storage-mali
3. lal Basediya, A., Samuel, D. V., & Beera, V. (2011). Evaporative cooling system for storage of fruits
   and vegetables - a review. Journal of Food Science and Technology, 50(3), 429–442.
   https://doi.org/10.1007/s13197-011-0311-6
4. Oluwasola, O. (2011). Pot-in-pot Enterprise: Fridge for the Poor. UNDP: Growing Inclusive Markets.
   https://www.yumpu.com/en/document/view/40867517/pot-in-pot-enterprise-fridge-for-the-poor-
   growing-inclusive-markets
5. Best Innovations of 2001: Food Cooling System. Time.
   http://content.time.com/time/specials/packages/article/0,28804,1936165_1936254_1936632,00.h
   tml
6. Verploegen, E., & Shankar, N. (2021). Clay pot Coolers: Preserving Fruits and Vegetables in Mali:
   Report 2016-2021. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
   https://d-lab.mit.edu/resources/publications/clay-pot-coolers-preserving-fruits-and-vegetables-
   mali-report-2016-2021
7. Verploegen, E., Mangino, M., Ognakossa, K. E., Ahamadou, A. & Cisse Diallo, F. (2021). Evaporative
   Cooling for Fruit & Vegetable Storage: A Guide to Assembling, Using, and Maintaining Clay Pot
   Coolers. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
   https://d-lab.mit.edu/resources/publications/guide-assembling-using-and-maintaining-clay-pot-
   coolers
8. Mali. World Food Programme. https://www.wfp.org/countries/mali
9. EC, JRC/PBL, 2012 Emission Database for Global Atmospheric Research, version 4.2.
   https://edgar.jrc.ec.europa.eu/
10. Sims R., R. Schaeffer, F. Creutzig, X. Cruz-Núñez, M. D’Agosto, D. Dimitriu, M.J. Figueroa Meza, L.
    Fulton, S. Kobayashi, O. Lah, A. McKinnon, P. Newman, M. Ouyang, J.J. Schauer, D. Sperling, and G.
    Tiwari, (2014). Transport. In: Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of
    Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
    [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S.
    Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlömer, C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel and J.C.
    Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.
    https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/02/ipcc_wg3_ar5_chapter8.pdf


                                                                                                       28
