EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: Evaluation of Evaporative Cooling
Technologies for Improved Vegetable Storage in Mali
Mali’s horticulture sector plays a vital role in supporting the country’s human nutrition and
health, income generation for farmers, and poverty alleviation. A lack of affordable and
effective post-harvest vegetable storage solutions often leads to vegetable spoilage, loss of
income, reduced access to nutritious foods, and significant amounts of time spent traveling to
purchase vegetables, particularly in rural communities. In Mali – and many other developing
regions – these challenges are found where farming is the predominant source of income and
food for populations who lack access to affordable methods for cooling and storage of
vegetables and leafy greens.

The objective of this research study is to investigate the potential for non-electric evaporative
cooling devices to address post-harvest vegetable storage challenges in rural Mali. The two
classes of devices evaluated in this study are commonly known as “evaporative cooling
chambers” (ECCs), which are generally used by horticulture cooperatives, and “clay pot
coolers,” which are generally used in households. These devices rely on the evaporation of
water to create a cooling effect, and their performance is significantly affected by the ambient
temperature and humidity of the environment in which they operate.

In this study, we used a combination of electronic sensors and structured user interviews to
gather information about users’ needs for improved post-harvest vegetable storage, current
methods of post-harvest vegetable storage, and the performance of evaporative cooling
devices.

                                                             B
                             A



                         C




            D                             E                                F

Above is an image of the three ECCs and three clay pot cooler devices included in this study: A) straw ECC, B) sack
ECC, C) brick ECC, D) cylinder pot-in-dish, E) round pot-in-dish, and F) pot-in-pot.



                                                                                                                 1
Results
The results of this study indicate that low-cost evaporative cooling devices, such as clay pot
coolers and ECCs, have the potential to benefit both off-grid populations with limited access to
electricity and on-grid populations with high electricity and/or equipment costs for
refrigerators. Evaporative cooling can improve vegetable storage shelf life by providing:
    • A stable storage environment with low temperature and high humidity, which reduces
        water loss and spoilage in most vegetables
    • Protection from animals and insects that contaminate and eat the vegetables
The improved storage environment can have positive impacts including reduced post-harvest
losses, less time spent traveling to the market, increased availability of vegetables for
consumption and monetary savings. These devices can also have farther-reaching impacts,
particularly for women who could benefit economically from producing and selling clay pots.

Our comparison of three types of ECCs demonstrates that ECCs made of brick are superior to
ECCs made of straw or burlap sacks. Brick ECCs provide a more stable low temperature and high
humidity environment, are easier to refill with water, and provide protection from animals and
insects. Due to these considerations, straw and sack ECCs are not recommended.

When comparing clay pot coolers, devices with the pot-in-pot configuration provided a greater
temperature decrease than clay pot coolers with the pot-in-dish configuration. Both types of
devices performed similarly on other metrics such as interior humidity, ease of watering, and
protection from animals and insects. Ninety percent of those interviewed reported that they
were no longer using any of their previous storage methods after receiving the clay pot coolers,
indicating that the 50 liter capacity of the clay pot coolers used in this study is sufficient to meet
the vegetable storage needs of most households. These results indicate that there are relatively
loose design constraints for constructing a clay pot cooler that provides a basic level of
performance, even if not optimized, creating an opportunity for locally available materials to be
repurposed to create an effective clay pot cooler for vegetable cooling and storage.

                   Summary of key characteristics for each evaporative cooling device
                          Average      Interior      Minimum            Protection
    Evaporative                                                                       Storage
                        temperature   humidity        watering        from animals                  Cost
   cooling device                                                                     volume
                         decrease*      range*       frequency         and insects
     ECC (straw)           5.4 °C     30-50%      1-3 times per day       No         250-4000 L   $50 - $250
     ECC (sack)            2.6 °C      10-30%     1-3 times per day       No         250-4000 L   $50 - $250
     ECC (brick)           5.8 °C     80-100%     once per 1-7 days       Yes        500-5000 L   $70 - $350
  Round pot-in-dish        5.1 °C     80-100%       once per day          Yes         10-150 L     $6 - $35
 Cylinder pot-in-dish      4.7 °C     80-100%       once per day          Yes         10-150 L     $6 - $35
     Pot-in-pot            6.7 °C     80-100%       once per day          Yes         10-100 L    $10 - $50

*For the data provided, the ambient relative humidity was less than 40% and the average daily ambient
temperature was between 29 °C and 37 °C.



                                                                                                               2
Recommendations
The most important first step for prospective users, producers, or promoters of ECCs and clay
pot coolers is to consider the suitability of evaporative cooling devices for the specific context
of interest by answering the question: Does the technology have the potential to effectively
meet the needs of the intended users?

The following factors should be assessed to determine the suitability of evaporative cooling
devices for a specific context:
   • Operating conditions: Specific conditions are required for evaporative cooling devices
       to effectively operate: low humidity, high temperature, access to water, and a shady,
       well-ventilated location.
   • Need: The storage conditions provided by evaporative cooling devices must meet the
       user’s needs, and the need for improved vegetable storage must occur during times of
       the year when evaporative cooling devices can operate effectively.
   • Value: The cost of the ECC or clay pot cooler must be affordable and justified by the
       benefits that will be realized due to the improved storage provided.

If evaporative cooling devices are deemed suitable for a given context, the key factors for
increasing their use are awareness, availability, quality, and affordability in the specific region. If
the devices can meet a community or region’s vegetable cooling and storage needs, the
following steps should be taken to increase their dissemination:
    • Identify end users who could benefit from evaporative cooling technologies
    • Raise awareness of the technology’s benefits among prospective end users
    • Increase availability of appropriately designed clay pots; organized production and
       distribution can increase availability, quality, and affordability

In addition to the full Evaluation Report from this research, we have created an interactive
“Evaporative Cooling Decision Making Tool” and an “Evaporative Cooling Best Practices Guide”
to support the determination of ECCs and clay pot cooler suitability and the devices’ proper
construction and use. The intended audience for these resources includes government
agencies, nongovernmental organizations, civil society organizations, and businesses that could
produce, distribute, and/or promote ECCs or clay pot coolers. These resources are available at:
http://d-lab.mit.edu/resources/projects/evaporative-cooling


Authors
Eric Verploegen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) D-Lab, Ousmane Sanogo, World
Vegetable Center (WVC), and Takemore Chagomoka, World Vegetable Center (WVC)




                                                                                                     3
